BIP 54: Consensus Cleanup (#1800)
bitcoin/bips: bip-cc.md

```
  BIP: ?
  Title: Consensus Cleanup
  Author: Antoine Poinsot <mail@antoinep.com>
          Matt Corallo <bips@bluematt.me>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-?
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2025-03-17
  License: CC0-1.0
```

> # Abstract

Author: Is it an established guideline? I don't mind doing it, just curious where this comes from.

Introduce new consensus rules in order to fix the timewarp attack, reduce the worst case block
validation, prevent Merkle tree weaknesses and avoid duplicate transactions without
[bip-0030][BIP30] validation.

# Motivation

This proposal addresses a number of long standing vulnerabilities and weaknesses in the Bitcoin
protocol. Bundling those fixes together allows to overcome the fixed cost of deploying a Bitcoin
soft fork.

> The timewarp bug permits a majority hashrate attacker to arbitrarily increase the block rate,

Author: I disagree. I dislike the tendency to use lists as a replacement for properly conveying the flow in words. There is literally one section per mitigation, i don't think having bullet points instead of paragraph will make this any clearer.

> The timewarp bug permits a majority hashrate attacker to arbitrarily increase the block rate,

Reviewer: You're welcome to improve the flow if you prefer that. Right now there's paragraph transitions like this:

> ... bring fee rates down for users.

> Specially crafted blocks may be expensive to process, ...

allowing them to steal block subsidy from future miners, and increase validation costs to nodes that
have to deal with the increased average transaction rate. By strategically setting the block
timestamp, the timewarp bug lets miners bring down the difficulty to its minimum within 38 days of
starting the attack. The existence of this bug not only significantly empowers a 51% attacker, but
also makes it notably harder to reason about miners' incentives. It could indeed be in the interest
of short-sighted miners as well as short-sighted users to exploit this vulnerability in a small
enough proportion to increase the block rate without fatally hurting the network, as the effectively
increased block space would - all others things equal - bring fee rates down for users.

Specially crafted blocks may be expensive to process, with validation times ranging from a few
minutes up to more than a hour on lower end devices. Long block validation times are a nuisance to
users, increasing the cost to independently fully validate the consensus rules. In addition they can
be used by miners to attack their competition, creating perverse incentives, centralization

> pressures and reduced network security.

Author: The comma you replace in your suggestion is there on purpose to avoid the "and" repetition.

In computing a block's Merkle root, a 64 bytes transaction can be interpreted as an intermediate
node in the tree in addition to a leaf. This makes it possible to fake inclusion proofs by
pretending a 64 bytes block transaction is an inner node, as well as to pretend the inner nodes on
one level of the tree are the actual block transactions.

Since [bip-0034][BIP34] activation, explicit [bip-0030][BIP30] validation is not necessary until
block height 1,983,702[^0].  Mandating new coinbase transactions be different from the early
[bip-0034][BIP34] violations makes it possible to get rid of [bip-0030][BIP30] validation forever.
Besides its unnecessary cost, another downside of [bip-0030][BIP30] validation is that it cannot be

> performed by Utreexo clients. Finally, leveraging the coinbase transaction's `nLockTime` field

Reviewer 2: utreexo is usually not capitalized:
```suggestion
performed by utreexo clients. Finally, leveraging the coinbase transaction's `nLockTime` field
```

Author: Why? I've always seen it named with the first letter capitalized, including on their Github.

Reviewer 2: I was looking mainly at https://github.com/utreexo/utreexod which uses the lowercase version, but indeed https://github.com/utreexo/biptreexo uses the capitalized one, so feel free to leave as is.

allows applications to recover the block height corresponding to a coinbase transaction without

> having to parse Bitcoin Script.

Author: Sure... :shrug:

> # Specification

Reviewer 3: I agree with @Christewart on the ML that it would be better to have this split up into multiple BIPs. If you decide to keep it as one BIP you should probably number the new rules so they can be more easily referenced. This is something that was requested of BIP94 in #1782 as well.

Author: As i replied on the mailing list thread, i am not going to split this BIP into parts as i think it would unnecessarily increase overhead and could impede progress. I am happy to assign numbers to the rules though, if you find it makes them easier to be referenced.

Author: I tried doing this but i couldn't find a way that did not add unnecessary clutter. It just seems seems to me that introducing numbers does not make the rules easier to reference. For instance "The Consensus Cleanup timewarp fix" is just clearer and less confusing than "The Consensus Cleanup rule 1".

For all blocks after activation the following new rules apply.

Given a block at height `N`:

> - if `N % 2016` is equal to `0` the `nTime` field of the block must be set to a value higher than or

Reviewer 2: Not all implementation call the timestamp `nTime`, so just calling it "timestamp" might be preferable.

Reviewer 2: From what I can tell, the other terms you mention enjoy pretty wide use outside of Bitcoin Core, however you could definitely replace them in line with [Murch's transaction terminology BIP](https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/blob/730a813124680a417f44bfe8117afbc89fd1ea6c/bip-tx-terminology.mediawiki) (i.e. locktime, sequence, input script and output script).

Author: Changed "`nTime` field" for "timestamp".

>   equal to the value of the `nTime` field of block at height `N-1` minus `7200`;

Reviewer 4: Maybe reword this to make it clearer that `minus 7200`  is subtracted from the value of `nTime`, and not from `height N-1` (so that no one unfamiliar with the context could read it as  "block at height N - 7201").

Author: Is this better?
```suggestion
  equal to the value minus `7200` of the `nTime` field of block at height `N-1`;
```

- if `N % 2016` is equal to `2015` the `nTime` field of the block must be set to a value higher than
  or equal to the value of the `nTime` field of block at height `N-2015`.

> A limit is set on the number of potentially executed signature operations in validating a

Author: I think dis-disambiguating "transaction *inputs*" is redundant with "signature operations in validating". Signature validation always occurs in validating a transaction's inputs.

As for the footnote i already have a similar one:
> \[^1]: Technically this limit *cannot* apply to a coinbase transaction as the size of its sole
input's scriptSig is limited.

> A limit is set on the number of potentially executed signature operations in validating a

Reviewer: Someone might wonder if we're including signature operations in the `scriptPubKey` for e.g. bare multisig. That's also covered by the term "potentially executed". Still, I think stating that the rule only impacts inputs is more clear than making it implicit.

> A limit is set on the number of potentially executed signature operations in validating a

Author: There is no need to wonder. It is clearly specified "For each input in the transaction, count the number of `CHECKSIG` and `CHECKMULTISIG` in the input scriptSig and previous output's scriptPubKey". I don't think this can be clearer: i don't see how an implementer could be mislead to go through the transaction outputs instead.

A limit is set on the number of potentially executed signature operations in validating a

> transaction. It applies to all transactions in the block except the coinbase transaction[^1]. For

Reviewer 5: You are right, it’s not.

> scriptSig and previous output's scriptPubKey, including the P2SH redeemScript. If the total is

Author: I don't think we should talk about witnesses or the segwit sigops discount. This explicitly mentions `scriptPubKey` (with bip16 `redeemScript`) and `scriptSig`.

Good point for the `VERIFY` version of opcodes.

> scriptSig and previous output's scriptPubKey, including the P2SH redeemScript. If the total is

Reviewer: > I don't think we should talk about witnesses or the segwit sigops discount.

That's going to confuse people. Unless you come up with completely different terminology, it's logical to assume legacy sigops are multiplied by 4.

> scriptSig and previous output's scriptPubKey, including the P2SH redeemScript. The accounting is the

Reviewer 2: I'm not, the redeem script is just a data push in the input script, and it's only when the previous output matches the P2SH template that it gets special treatment. Not mentioning it explicitly would definitely make it ambiguous as to whether it's included in the count.

[bip-0016][BIP16 specs]: a `CHECKSIG` operation accounts for `1` and a `CHECKMULTISIG` accounts for
the number of public keys associated, or `20` if the number of public keys is greater than `16`. A
`CHECKMULTISIG` not directly preceded by a minimally-pushed number between `1` and `16` (included)

> accounts for `20`.

Reviewer 2: This should probably be rewritten, as it first introduces one accounting method (count the number of `CHECKSIG` and `CHECKMULTISIG` and check if the count is less than or equal to 2500) and only then changes the accounting for `CHECKMULTISIG`.

Author: Suggestions welcome, i wrote this a few times when i wrote the document. This is the clearest i could come up with. Alternatives made the sentence too heavy.

Reviewer 2: Here is my attempt at rewriting the section, with the main goal to avoid implying that 2500 is the maximum count of CHECKSIG and CHECKMULTISIG opcodes before explaining how they actually contribute to the total:
```suggestion
A limit is set on the number of potentially executed signature operations in validating a
transaction. It applies to all transactions in the block except the coinbase transaction[^1]. For
each input in the transaction, count the number of `CHECKSIG` and `CHECKMULTISIG` in the input
scriptSig and previous output's scriptPubKey, including the P2SH redeemScript. A `CHECKSIG`
operation contributes 1 to the total, and a `CHECKMULTISIG` contributes the number of public
keys associated, or 20 if the number of public keys is greater than 16. A `CHECKMULTISIG` not
directly preceded by a minimally-pushed number between 1 and 16 (included) contributes 20 to
the total. If the total is strictly higher than 2500, the transaction is invalid.
```

Author: Took your suggestion of only mentioning the limit at the end. Reworded to fit in @Sjors' point about explicitly mentioning the `VERIFY` counterparts to the operations. How do you find it now?

Author: Removed backticks for numbers all across the document.

total is strictly higher than 2500, the transaction is invalid.

Transactions whose witness-stripped serialized size is exactly 64 bytes are made invalid.

> The coinbase transaction's `nLockTime` field must be set to the height of the block minus 1[^2]

Reviewer 6: nLockTime is the most ideal location to put an extranonce, so it seems like a bad idea to burn it for no good reason.

Author: It would have been better to bring up conceptual feedback on the mailing list. "For no good reason" is unnecessarily aggressive, the point here is not to make things invalid just for the sake of it. Please engage charitably to foster productive discussions.

To your point, it's my understanding that `nLockTime` makes for a good extranonce because it's serialized at the very end of the coinbase transaction. Rolling it does not require re-hashing the whole transaction as you can just cache a midstate for the first 64 bytes. Could you provide more details about how you expect it to be used exactly, and under what circumstances the operation it improves may become a bottleneck?

Reviewer 6: >@luke-jr why would miners switch to something different from the current extraNonce?

There is no "current extraNonce". Extranonces can be anywhere in theory. But this particular location, as @darosior says, minimises the need to re-hash a lot of data to roll it. That means it can more practically be done on ASICs or MCUs with nearly no latency.

Reviewer: Can you do the same with an output? Since a coinbase doesn't have any inputs to sign, rolling an `OP_RETURN` output should be just as easy and there's no space limit?

Author: @luke-jr i see how it might be useful in theory but i don't think it would be in realistic conditions. Could you describe the specifics of a future ASIC design where it would matter?

Author: I'm moving this discussion [to the Delving thread](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/great-consensus-cleanup-revival/710/85?u=antoinep). Please @luke-jr provide more details there so your objection can be addressed.

Reviewer 6: I don't use Delving

Author: Then can you please share details about your objection *somewhere*? Anywhere. Here, the dev mailing list, not Delving, 0bin, whatever.

Just sharing vague concerns without details makes it really hard to address your objection. And i trust it is not your intention to prevent having an objective discussion about the tradeoff being made here.

# Rationale

The restrictions on the timestamp of the first and last blocks of a difficulty adjustment period fix

> the timewarp and Murch-Zawy vulnerabilities[^3]. The latter poses mostly theoretical concerns but is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the timewarp and Murch–Zawy vulnerabilities[^3]. The latter poses mostly theoretical concerns but is
```

Author: I remember hearing English had different dashes, but i didn't expect it'd come up as a Pull Request review comment one day! I'm not even sure how to produce those, and to be honest this is probably not the best use of our time.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the en dash (–) is commonly used to connect names in a compound name to distinguish them from a double-barrelled name which uses a hyphen (-). That's how you know, for example, that the Gell-Mann–Okubo mass formula was named after two people, Gell-Mann and Okubo.

If you're not sure how to produce an en dash, copypasting it is fine too 😉  Alternatively, if neither Murch nor Zawy care about not being mistaken for the same person named Murch-Zawy, feel free to leave as is.

Author: I for one have never seen @murchandamus and @zawy12 in the same room at the same time!

extremely low risk to fix: the duration of an adjustment period has never been, and should never be,
negative. The former is fixed by preventing the timestamp of the first block of a difficulty period

> to be lower than the previous block's, with a two hours grace period. A [previous

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from being lower than the previous block's, with a two-hour grace period. A [previous
```

> proposal][BIP-XXXX] to fix timewarp used a ten minutes grace period instead, also adopted for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
proposal][BIP-XXXX] to fix timewarp used a ten-minute grace period instead, also adopted for
```

[testnet4][BIP94 timewarp]. Out of an abundance of caution and because it only trivially worsens the

> block rate increase under attack, a two hours grace period is used here[^4].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
block rate increase under attack, a two-hour grace period is used here[^4].
```

block rate increase under attack, a two-hour grace period is used here[^4].

Disabling some Script operations and functionalities was [previously proposed][BIP-XXXX] to reduce
the worst case block validation time but was met with resistance due to confiscation concerns[^5]. A
delicate balance needs to be struck between minimizing the confiscation risks of a mitigation, even
if merely theoretical, and bounding the costs one could impose on all other users of the system. To

> this effect a limit on the number of potentially executed signature operations pinpoints exactly the

Author: I think this suggestion changes the meaning. What i intend to convey is exactly how you would read it: it precisely disable the harmful behaviour to avoid making uninteresting-but-harmless usage invalid.

> harmful behaviour, leaving maximum flexibility in how Script functionalities may have been used.

Author: Agree with Vojtěch. Not taking the suggestion.

increases the preparation cost of an attack to make it uneconomical for a miner[^6]. The `2500`
value was chosen as the tightest value that did not make any non-pathological standard transaction
invalid[^7].

> In the presence of 64 bytes transactions a block header's Merkle root may be valid for different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the presence of 64-byte transactions a block header's Merkle root may be valid for different
```

> sets of transactions. This is because in the Merkle tree construction a 64 bytes transaction may be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sets of transactions. This is because in the Merkle tree construction a 64-byte transaction may be
```

> interpreted as the catenation of two 32 bytes hashes, or the catenation of two 32 bytes hashes may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interpreted as the catenation of two 32-byte hashes, or the catenation of two 32-byte hashes may
```

be interpreted as a transaction. The former allows to fake a block inclusion proof and the latter
makes it such that for a valid block the Merkle root in the block header is not a unique identifier

> for the corresponding list of valid transactions[^8]. 64 bytes transactions can only contain an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for the corresponding list of valid transactions[^8]. 64-byte transactions can only contain an
```

> output Script that lets anyone spend the funds, or burns them.  They have also been non-standard for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
output script that lets anyone spend the funds, or burns them.  They have also been non-standard for
```

Author: Rationale?

Reviewer 2: "Script" is the name of the scripting language, while a "script" is any program written in Script. See [this handy diagram](https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/122808/121614) I've made, and for even more details check out [Murch's transaction terminology BIP](https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/blob/730a813124680a417f44bfe8117afbc89fd1ea6c/bip-tx-terminology.mediawiki).

> output Script that lets anyone spend the funds, or burns them.  They have also been non-standard for

Reviewer: @Christewart's draft BIP seems to to make the claim that this is indeed the case:

> Pre-segwit 64-byte transactions that spend a nonstandard utxo that are inherently malleable.

https://github.com/Christewart/bips/blob/2024-12-20-64bytetxs/bip-XXXX.mediawiki#pre-segwit-64-byte-transactions

I don't fully understand the reasoning though.

> output Script that lets anyone spend the funds, or burns them.  They have also been non-standard for

Reviewer: Asked on Stack Exchange: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/125971/can-any-consensus-valid-64-byte-transaction-be-third-party-malleated-to-change

> output Script that lets anyone spend the funds, or burns them.  They have also been non-standard for

Author: It seems the only actionable item left in this review comment is:
> It would be good to elaborate on these two specific claims.

I'm not sure how to elaborate further than that. I think this is enough for the reader to think about it and convince themselves it is the case and more information would just be superfluous. Closing this but feel free to reopen if you have a suggestion.

> output script that lets anyone spend the funds, or burns them.  They have also been non-standard for

Author: Yes. I like your terminology BIP, but i think i will go for the more common scriptPubKey instead.

mitigated by committing to the Merkle tree depth in the header's version field[^9]. The authors

> believe it is preferable to address the root cause by invalidating 64 bytes transactions. This

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
believe it is preferable to address the root cause by invalidating 64-byte transactions. This
```

approach also fixes the vulnerability without developers of SPV verifiers having to implement the
mitigation or to know it is necessary in the first place.

> Several blocks prior to [bip-0034][BIP34] activation contain a coinbase transaction such as its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several blocks prior to [bip-0034][BIP34] activation contain a coinbase transaction whose
```

scriptSig contains a valid [bip-0034][BIP34] commitment to a future block height. This offers an
opportunity to duplicate these coinbase transactions in the future[^10] and for this reason
[bip-0030][BIP30] validation will need to be re-activated from block 1,983,702. A simple way to
prevent this is to mandate that future coinbase transactions vary slightly from coinbase
transactions before [bip-0034][BIP34] activation. There are multiple ways of achieving this, but
enforcing the timelock for the coinbase transaction makes it so all coinbase transactions past
Consensus Cleanup activation could not have been valid before this height and therefore cannot be a
duplicate[^11].

# Backward compatibility

This proposal only tightens the block validation rules: there is no block that is valid under the
rules proposed in this BIP but not under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules. As a consequence
these changes are backward-compatible with unupgraded node software. That said, the authors strongly

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer: You should elaborate on the changes miners SHOULD and MUST make. Either in this section or one specifically for miners.

- "MUST" in order to avoid accidentally producing an invalid block under the new rules
- "SHOULD" to avoid accidentally producing an invalid block under _the current rules_, as well to ensure that they _only_ have to upgrade their node software when the fork activates.

They MUST run software that respects the `mintime` field of `getblocktemplate` (BIP 22 / 33) at the time of activation. They SHOULD do so already

They SHOULD run node software that sets `mintime` in a way that doesn't violate the timewarp rule, i.e. Bitcoin Core >= v29.

They MUST set nLockTime in their coinbase transactions once the rule takes effect. They MAY or SHOULD (?) do it earlier.

They MUST run bitcoin node software that considers 64 byte transactions non-standard (e.g. Bitcoin Core > v?).

They MUST run bitcoin node software with standardness rules that already effectively enforce the new sigop restriction.

If they mine non-standard transactions, they MUST carefully consider the risks.

Author: I'm not sure about this. That miners should respect the `mintime` is not new, not a change they need to make and would be out of place here. That miner should run software that enforces the new consensus rules makes sense for any soft fork and is not specific to this BIP, or to miners specifically for that matter. The same goes for the rest.

Reviewer: Which previous soft fork required miners to upgrade their full stack to produce valid blocks, rather than just their node? E.g. SegWit didn't, because by default blocks don't mandate a witness commitment.

`mintime` isn't new, but still a good reminder. And upgrading their stratum v1 stack to something that supports a completely new BIP, otherwise they won't set `nLockTime`, is absolutely critical. And it shouldn't come as an implementation detail surprise after this BIP is widely accepted.

Author: Sorry, what in this BIP do you believe requires upgrading the Stratum v1 protocol?

Reviewer: The changes to the coinbase need to be added to `getblocktemplate` and Stratum v1 software which relies on that RPC needs to use these fields.

Author: This is not a change in the mining protocol. GBT changes have historically been part of a different BIP (see for instance [bip-0145](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0145.mediawiki)) and this is what i intend to do here, if at all necessary.

Reviewer: BIP 145 was optional. Miners weren't required to upgrade before SegWit activation, they could do so whenever they felt like mining a segwit block. It even has documentation on how to support unupgraded miners.

It's fine to define these details in another BIP, but this BIP should point out that it's mandatory and has to be done _before_ activation.

Reviewer: Some historical discussion about how long it took for miners to upgrade their pool software _after_ SegWit activated: https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/q/86208/4948

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Author: I'm confused. This seems to directly follow for any consensus change: miners must take steps to produce blocks valid according to the new rule. I don't mind adding a sentence to this effect, but as far as i know the backwards compatibility section has always been used to discuss the backwards compatibility from the point of view of end users, not miners (since by definition block producers need to adapt if we are going to change block validity). See for instance the [backwards compatibility section of the SegWit soft fork](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki#user-content-Backward_compatibility).

> This proposal only tightens the block validation rules: there is no block that is valid under the
> rules proposed in this BIP but not under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules. As a consequence
> these changes are backward-compatible with unupgraded node software. That said, the authors strongly
> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Author: I tried adding something to this effect but anything i come up with just seems needlessly redundant. For instance:
```suggestion
This proposal only tightens the block validation rules: there is no block that is valid under the
rules proposed in this BIP but not under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules. As a consequence
these changes are backward-compatible with unupgraded node software. That said, the authors strongly
encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

As with any consensus change, miners need to take precautions to produce blocks compatible with the
new rules. In particular this BIP introduces restrictions on the coinbase transaction and block
header timestamp, which are often set by closed source pool software.
```

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer 7: Instead of 
"This proposal only tightens the block validation rules: there is no block that is valid under the
rules proposed in this BIP but not under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules." 
I would say
"The proposed rule doesn't invalidated any existing blocks, but nodes should upgrade to ensure invalid future blocks that were valid under the old rules are not created or validated."

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer 5: AFAIU,

- Backward-compatible means new software being able to read data generated by old software.
- Forward-compatible means old software being able to read data generated by new software.

How about:

```diff
-This proposal only tightens the block validation rules: there is no block that is valid under the
-rules proposed in this BIP but not under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules. As a consequence
-these changes are backward-compatible with unupgraded node software. That said, the authors strongly
-encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.
+This proposal only tightens the block validation rules: any block that would be valid under the
+rules proposed in this BIP is valid under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules. As a consequence
+these changes are forward-compatible to unupgraded node software. That said, the authors strongly
+encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.
+
+Block producers will need to upgrade to new software to produce valid blocks per the new rules.
```

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Author: > ```diff
> +any block that would be valid under the
> +rules proposed in this BIP is valid under the existing Bitcoin consensus rules. As a consequence
> +these changes are forward-compatible to unupgraded node software.
> ```

This is backward. The changes are backward-compatible with unupgraded nodes. Nodes are forward-compatible with future soft forks.

> ```diff
> +Block producers will need to upgrade to new software to produce valid blocks per the new rules.
> ```

Again, this is by definition true of any single soft fork. I don't see why we should start mentioning now as if it was something specific to Consensus Cleanup.

I don't think there is much more to do here.

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer 5: I see that I will have to be careful to be more precise in this pull request. 

I’m  just thinking that you will get a bunch of readers to whom it is not obvious that miners have to upgrade for a soft fork, and where e.g., SegWit did accept some portion of old blocks, this change will require them to upgrade. Therefore, I think it wouldn’t be unreasonable to mention that miners will have to upgrade to produce valid blocks, even if it may seem obvious.

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Author: As this has been requested by different people, i have added more information regarding compatibility. As @Sjors also pointed out earlier, what we are concerned about here is miners producing blocks that are valid according to these new rules. I have therefore added a new "Miner forward compatibility" section which gives more details about this topic. Let me know what you think.

https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/24f0707cd639d6ec28b0f9e1a407daae8ac8fdda/bip-0054.md?plain=1#L132-L148

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer 5: LGTM

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer: Link to what I wrote above: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1800#discussion_r2016143661

Only bit that's missing, maybe to add in the timewarp section, is that they must ensure the `mintime` field of getblocktemplate is honoured, or use `curtime` without modification. Although it's true they should do that already, in the past 10 years afaik they would never have produced an invalid block. Having increased the grace period from 10 minutes to two hours also makes it extremely unlikely to run into this.

But if miners are looking at their coinbase generation code anyway, they should check this.

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Author: I think this is unnecessarily heavy and confusing, but i added a sentence about how miners should use `curtime` or `mintime` from `getblocktemplate` and not a timestamp pulled out of nowhere. Let me know if you think the sentence to this effect can be materially improved.

> encourage node operators to upgrade in order to fully validate all consensus rules.

Reviewer: That looks fine.

# Acknowledgements

This document builds upon an [earlier proposal][BIP-XXXX] by one of the authors.

The authors would like to thank everyone involved in researching the most appropriate mitigation for
each of these bugs. We would like to thank in particular Anthony Towns and Sjors Provoost for their
direct contributions to this proposal, as well as @0xb10c and Brian Groll for providing the authors
with data to analyze the proposed mitigations.

# Copyright

This document is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal license.

[^0]: Block 1,983,702 is the earliest future block which could contain a duplicate coinbase
transaction while still respecting [bip-0034][BIP34]. See [this post][Delving duplicable] for a list
of all such future blocks.
[^1]: Technically this limit *cannot* apply to a coinbase transaction as the size of its sole
input's scriptSig is limited.
[^2]: The locktime validation, which is also performed for coinbase transactions, enforces that the
nLockTime value is the last block at which a transaction is invalid, not the first one at which it
is valid.

> [^3]: The timewarp attack is described [here][SE timewarp] and the Murch-Zawy attack [here][Delving

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[^3]: The timewarp attack is described [here][SE timewarp] and the Murch–Zawy attack [here][Delving
```

Author: Let's discuss those in one place: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1800#discussion_r2021743417. Closing this one.

Murch-Zawy].

> [^4]: A bug in testnet4 pushed blocks' timestamps in the future when exploited, revealing how some

Reviewer 3: nit: FWIW, the min-difficulty blocks were definitely a feature, requested to be kept around from Testnet3 in the Testnet4 PR ([here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/29775#issuecomment-2047753470), [here](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/29775#issuecomment-2067788551)) and specified in the BIP. Instead of exploited I would say "overused" or "maxed out"

Author: Yeah, "bug" is not a correct characterization since it was intentional. However i think "exploited" is fair since people apparently assumed all participants would always be honest, and, well, they are not.

I went with "abused" to use a little bit less loaded language:
```suggestion
[^4]: The testnet4 exception pushed blocks' timestamps in the future when abused, revealing how some
```

What do you think?

features in its output script. The transaction cannot be mined before activation. Such outputs would
not be covered by an amnesty for old UTxOs. See for instance [here][O'Connor OP_CODESEPARATOR] and
[here][O'Connor sighash type] for discussions on this topic.
[^6]: It is important to reduce the worst case block validation time as well as the ratio of
validation time imposed over preparation cost. The former is to limit the damages an externally
motivated attacker can do. The latter is to disincentivize miners slowing down their competition by
mining expensive blocks. See [this thread][ML thread validation time] for more.
[^7]: A non-pathological transaction would have a public key per signature operation and at least
one signature per input. Per standardness a single P2SH input may not have more than 15 signature
operations. Even by using 1-of-15 `CHECKMULTISIG`s a transaction would bump against the maximum
standard transaction size before running into the newly introduced limit. To run against the newly
introduced limit but not the transaction size a transaction would need to spend P2SH inputs with a

> redeem script similar to `CHECKSIG DROP CHECKSIG DROP ..`. This type of redeem script serves no

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
redeem script similar to `CHECKSIG DROP CHECKSIG DROP ...`. This type of redeem script serves no
```

Author: Really?..

*(see what i did here?)*
